
Climbing hills

Steep hills can be one of the trickiest obstacles you’re likely to encounter while driving off-road. Not only have you got a gradient to contend with, but gravity is also working against you. It just doesn’t seem fair. However, science is on your side – when attempting the climb for the first time, consider the proven formula for success: A successful climb = the correct route + sufficient traction + sufficient momentum.

Rules of thumb
	High / Low Range: Low
	Gears: Select the highest practical gear if slippery
	Suspension: Raise if necessary
	Diff lock(s): Engage
	Speed: Momentum may be needed, but ease off at you approach the top
	Note: Be prepared for failure and know how to recover from it

Choose the correct route
The route you pick depends on a number of factors which can be influenced by the following:
	Obstacles such as trees or rocks
	The presence of existing tracks
	Ruts
	Tricky ‘no go’ areas (such as slippery or difficult ground conditions)
	The rule of thumb when climbing hills is to attack the slope using a route which minimises any side angles where possible. If you start to slide sideways you’ll have very little control over your vehicle, but sliding forwards or backwards can be controlled. 
However, if you’re driving in a rutted track it can be best to stick to the exiting route. If your wheels are positioned in the ruts it’s very unlikely that a sideways slide will occur. 

If you start to slide backwards, follow the techniques explained here

Failing to climb
If you’ve failed to make it to the top, the chances are it’s either because of one of the following:
	Lack of grip – if there isn’t enough friction available between the tyre and the ground surface to get you to the top, you’re going to need more momentum. More speed, however means more danger so make sure you’re confident about your decision.
	Lack of momentum – if you fail to get to to the top due to a lack of momentum, you’re likely to stall or simply run out of steam and may even stall the engine. 


	
Driving in deep water

Wading though deep water can be one of the most enjoyable and exciting aspects of off-road driving, however it can also be dangerous and may damage your vehicle. Follow our guide below to minimise the risk and increase your chances of getting to the other side. Please note, this article is intended for those with a 4×4 vehicle and decent off-road driving experience. Rules of thumb

	Check your vehicle’s maximum wading depth
	Recce the crossing on foot
	Consider the environmental impact
	Select a gear which reduces the chances of stalling
	Use a bow wave to artificially reduce the depth of the water
	Keep moving and don’t let the engine stop
	
	
Descending hills

When descending a steep or slippery hill, it’s important to consider the consequences of losing traction and being unable to stop on the slope. If you’re pointing directly up or down-slope it’s relatively easy to control your direction even without the ability to stop, however if you start to slide sideways you’re best course of action may be to close your eyes and wait for the crunch.	

The technique
	1.	Stop well before the slope begins and get out of the car.
	2.	Check the slope for obstacles and ensure you have a suitable run-off area in the event of complete loss of traction.
	3.	Stick to existing tracks if possible (ruts will help prevent you sliding sideways).
	4.	Select a gear which is suitable for the conditions and the severity of the slope. Low gears provide better engine braking, but may cause a loss of traction on particularly low grip surfaces.
	5.	Engage any differential locks you have fitted, and turn on any electronic aids designed to help descents.
	6.	Pull away, and ensure the clutch is completely released (if you’re in a manual) before the slope begins.
	7.	Ensure you are lined up correctly and your wheels are completely straight when beginning the descent.
	8.	Do not touch the brakes unless you need to come to a stop – this will either trigger ABS, or make the wheels likely to lock which will mean you’ll be unable to steer.
	9.	Use engine tick over to ensure maximum engine braking, avoid using the throttle or brakes.


Ditch crossing

Ditch crossings can be quite hard on your car unless the correct technique is used. There is a risk of contact with the ground, and loss of traction is fairly likely depending on the size of the ditch.

What not to do:
Crossing a ditch straight will cause both front wheels to fall into the depression simultaneously and for the front suspension to compress. This can cause the front of the vehicle to make contact with the ground, or reduce traction to the point where you might become stuck.

The correct ditch crossing technique:
To negotiate a ditch in a more reliable manner, cross at an angle, allowing only one wheel to enter the ditch at a time. This provides the greatest chance of success by maintaining the best possible traction using three out of the four wheels. Ensure all the traction aids at your disposal are engaged (such as traction control and differential lock). Tackle the ditch at a slow speed, but have sufficient momentum to drive the vehicle through. If you have the luxury of adjustable suspension, ensure the highest setting is selected to prevent any contact with the ground. Be prepared to increase the throttle slightly if wheels start to spin.