

How to change a tire:
	1.	Remove your spare and the tools you'll need.
	
	2.	Place flares or reflective triangles behind your vehicle for safety, if 
	you're changing your tire on the road.
	
	3.	Place wheel wedges against the tires opposite of the flat. This will help keep your vehicle secure while it's on the jack.
	
	4.	Remove the hubcap or wheel cover. If your lug nuts are exposed, skip this step. Use the flat end of the lug wrench to pry the cover off.
	
	5.	Loosen (but DON'T REMOVE) the lug nuts using the lug wrench.
	
	6.	Move the jack underneath the car. Reference your vehicle owner's manual for the proper location and how to work your jack. Ideally, it will be as easy as turning a crank. Raise it up to connect with your car's frame.
	
	7.	Expand the jack until the flat is approximately 6 inches off the ground. Warning: Do not put any part of your body under the vehicle!
	
	8.	Unscrew and remove lug nuts. Place these somewhere safe—you'll need them all to secure the spare.
	
	9.	Remove the flat tire from the hub. Grab the flat securely with both hands and pull toward you. Set it aside safely.
	
	10.	Align the spare with the exposed lug bolts. Push it in place.
	
	11.	Replace the lug nuts and tighten by hand. Do NOT use the wrench until you lower the vehicle.
	
	12.	Lower the jack carefully until the spare touches the ground. Remove the jack.
	
	13.	Tighten the lug nuts with the wrench. Put your weight into it—these should be really tight. To ensure even alignment, tighten your lug nuts in a star pattern, so you're never tightening lug nuts that are immediately adjacent to one another.
	
	14.	Replace the hubcap or wheel cover, if you have one.
	
	15.	Check the pressure on your spare. If you don't have a tire gauge, try to drive to a gas station to check and make sure it's safe.
	
	
How to change your oil:
	1.	Check the type and amount of oil needed
	
	2.	Get together your filter, wrenches, and other supplies
	
	3.	Prepare your vehicle
	
	4.	Locate the oil filter and drain plug
	
	5.	Drain the oil
	
	6.	Tighten the drain plug
	
	7.	Change the oil filter
	
	8.	Add the new oil
	
	9.	Check the oil level
	
	
How to replace a U-Joint
	1.	Secure the vehicle on a solid level surface so that it does not roll or lean when raised.
	
	2.	Using a floor jack, raise the vehicle.
	
	3.	Secure the vehicle with jack stands on both sides for safety before starting any work. Do not rely on the jack to hold the vehicle up while working.
	
	4.	Paint a reference line on the end of the driveshaft and the companion flange so that they can be reassembled in the same position to maintain proper driveshaft balance.
	
	5.	Disconnect the U-bolts or U-clamps which hold the rear U-joint to the pinion flange. Wrap tape around the loose bearing cups to prevent them from falling off.
	
	6.	Remove the driveshaft from the transmission by sliding it backwards.
	
	7.	Inspect the yoke seal for damage and replace if necessary.
	
	8.	Position the drive shaft in a sturdy bench vise.
	
	9.	Remove the snap rings which retain the bearings in the slip yoke (front only) and in the driveshaft (front and rear).
	
	10.	Using assorted sockets, press the bearing cups out of the yoke and the drive shaft with a large bench vise or an arbor press. By closing the vice, the smaller socket will drive the bearing through one side and the larger socket will allow the bearing to be driven out on other side.
	
	11.	As each bearing cup is forced far enough out of the universal joint assembly, grip the bearing cap, with a pair of pliers, and pull them off.
	
	12.	Drive the U-joint in the opposite direction in order to make the opposite bearing accessible, and pull it free with a pair of pliers. Use this procedure to remove all the bearings from both universal joints.
	
	13.	After removing the bearing caps, pull the U-joint from the drive shaft and yoke
	
	14.	Thoroughly clean all the dirt and foreign matter from the yokes and both ends of the driveshaft.
	
	15.	Install one bearing cap part way into one side of the yoke.
	
	16.	Start the U-joint into the bearing cap and then partially install the other cap. Align the U-joint and press the bearing caps into position, being careful not to damage the seals or needle bearings.
	
	17.	Install the snap-rings. If you are having problems seating the snap-rings, strike the driveshaft yoke sharply with a hammer. This will spring the yoke ears slightly and allow the snap-rings to seat in the groove.
	
	18.	Position the driveshaft and insert the front yoke into the transmission so that the splines mesh with the splines of the transmission shaft.
	
	19.	Using reference marks made during removal, align the driveshaft with the companion flange and secure it with the U-bolts or U-clamps.
	
	20.	Install the grease fitting and fill the joint with grease. Be careful not to overfill the U-joint, as this could blow out the grease seals.
	
	21.	Test the U-joint to verify repairs.
	

How to change differential fluid:
	1: Secure the vehicle on jack stands or ramps. Locate the differential drain bolt. Loosen and remove.

	2: Allow time for the gear oil to completely drain. Replace the drain bolt. Wipe any excess gear oil from the case.

	3: Locate and remove the gear oil fill bolt.

	4: Use a pump to slowly add the recommended type of gear oil to the differential.

	5: Add the recommended amount of gear oil to the differential, or until gear oil starts to dribble out of the fill hole.

	6: Reinstall and tighten the fill hole bolt. Wipe off any excess gear oil from the case.

