

These tips and tricks best summarize what you need to know when off roading. Give them a read and enjoy the trails!

	GO SLOW: Many times newbies think hitting the gas hard will get you out of trouble. While gas can help in some situations, it can also get you into a lot of trouble fast. It is also easier on your truck to go slow and take your time. When you go slow it helps to keep traction. Traction is your friend. When you're spinning your tires, you have decreased traction. Let the tires work for you and go slow.

	ALONG WITH THAT IS MOMENTUM: Momentum will help you get up some ledges, hills, and mud holes. This means starting farther back from an obstacle. This comes with experience. Knowing how much momentum you need without going too fast depends on the obstacle. When in doubt watch someone else and learn from their mistakes or experience. Try hitting it with a little momentum and then decide if you need a little more if that doesn't work.

	KNOW YOUR LIMITS: Especially when alone and/or you decide to do some hardcore wheeling before you are due at work! Best to only test your limits when wheeling with another rig or more. If your truck won't clear an obstacle, hitting it harder is just going to damage the truck and give other people something to laugh about. Don't try to bite off more then you can chew. It could just coast you your rig.

	MUD: Test the mud first if you have never crossed the hole. Get a stick or something to see if the bottom is 2' down or 6' down, or if the bottom feels soft or hard. Mud holes can be deceiving. A soft base can swallow your truck. When entering a mud hole get a little momentum. As you enter the hole if you feel yourself getting stuck, start turning the front wheel left to right. This can help gain you some traction. Go as far as you can forward if you can't get out. Once forward momentum is stopped try reverse, also moving the front tires left to right. Sometimes you can back out of a hole. Of course your friends will still want to see you hit it again...

		NOTE: Keep your windows up when mud boggin'. Its sucks getting sprayed in the face or having to clean the inside of your windshield, dash etc.

	HILLS: After guessing on how much momentum you need, try to hit a hill straight on as much as possible. Keeping all wheels on the ground will increase traction. Keep on the gas and keep forward momentum unless you sense your truck getting sideways or going over backwards. If so, let off the gas and regain some control. If you ever feel you are going over backwards, let off the brakes to allow the front end to come down and the truck to slowly roll down till you can stop again. Sometimes putting the truck in reverse and letting out the clutch can help keep things under control. I have only done this while on snow and a steep hill when sliding backwards. Might come in handy on a longer hill.

	STUCK: When you get stuck try letting your tire pressure down. This will give your tires more surface area for better traction and will help make the ride more smoothly over bumps. But don't let them down to much. And don't drive fast with them deflated you could break a bead. When you return to the pavement air them back up so your tires don't wear abnormally.

		NOTE: About 10lbs. min. Some tires require different pressure to get the tire to bulge. You can air down by holding the bleed pin down but it can take a while. I use a small needle nose pliers to unscrew the valve and take it out. There are also air valves that let out air automatically. They take the guesswork out and keep you from messing up taking out an air valve. Also nice cuz you can keep driving as your tires air down (cost about $50.00)

	STALLED WHEN DIVING: If you stall with your tailpipe under water, don't crank it. Get a tug out of the water and pull the spark plugs before turning the engine over. Unlike air, water doesn't compress very well and a cylinder full will result in a destroyed engine if you try to crank it back up. With the plugs out, turn the engine over a few times and the water will be ejected without bending rods and pistons.

	GOING SLOW WITHOUT GEARS: When going over obstacles when you want to go slow and you don't have crawler gears and can't go slow enough without burning the clutch and stalling a lot. So I pull the parking brake a bit to put some tension on the driveline. This helps slow the vehicle a bit and gives you better ability to work the gas.

	STALLED IN A SITUATION: If you have the clutch start cancel button it can be handy. When you're going over big obstacles you don't want to roll back if you stall. So leave the truck in gear and hit the "clutch start cancel" button. Turn the key and allow the starter gear to move the truck a bit while the engine starts again. Then you're off again moving over the obstacle without having to engage the clutch.

	WINCHING: When using a power winch, or a come-along, throw an old jacket, towel, or other loose object over the line. This way, if the cable breaks, the object on the line will help slow the loose end so it does not whip back and hurt someone.

		NOTE: When buying your winch make sure it has a min. of 6000 lb. lift capability. This should have close to 10,000 lb. pulling weight. Winches usually have twice the pulling capability than lifting.

	TOW STRAPS: Go to Wallmart, tractor supply, or other and pick up a good tow strap that is rated for at least twice the weight of your vehicle. Chains can break and when they do it is very dangerous. Straps work really well. I would recommend buying one with loops on both ends and not the hooks. The hooks are nice but they can come loose if given any slack. Besides I haven't encountered a time when I couldn't use my loop end straps.

	NEVER USE CHAINS: Chains can be a huge no-no! If it's the only thing you've got at the moment don't hit the end of it hard when pulling out a stuck rig. Never use any type of recovery strap with hard parts such as hooks, which can become projectiles.

	STEERING: When wheeling, hold the steering wheel with your THUMBS OUT. That is, do not grab the wheel like a baseball bat. Why? If you rig hits a rut, rock, or other obstacle just the right way, your wheel could spin too fast for you to react, possibly hurting your thumbs. By keeping them on the outside of the wheel, you reduce the risk of injury from the steering wheel spokes.

	KEEP YOUR HANDS IN THE TRUCK! Don't try pushing off to keep your truck from touching a rock or dirt wall. I've done it and I've seen people do it. Its dumb and you could loose an arm.

	LEAVE THE TRAILS CLEAN: What you pack in, make sure you pack out. When you leave a trail, take out more than you brought in. If you see trash, pick it up. It only takes a few seconds. A clean trail is an open trail. Don't give wheeling a bad name by trashing the trails.

	TOOLS: Keep a small tool set on hand that has all the essentials. Something like a 42 or 60 pc. set. I always leave it in my truck just incase.	A Hi-lift jack is a very good tool and not just for lifting your rig when needed. They can be attached to the front or back of a rig and used like a com-a-long. Also when I still had the old stock steering setup I bent the U-arm down about 1 1/2"-2". I used the Hi-lift to re-bend it so I could get home. Steel wire is also a good thing to have. You never know when use need to tie something up. Back to the old steering setup.....I used the wire to tie the drag link to the U-arm. It looked pretty iffy, but it worked.	Always carry wd-40 for dispersing water from distributor, etc. $2.00 spent can mean the difference between walking and driving.	A good use of imagination when fixing something. If you need a lead tester and don't have one, take out one of your taillights and some speaker wire and rig up one of your own. A buddy of mine and me had to do this to test a starter.

	EXTRA PARTS: Any spare parts that you can bring along are always good to have. Not just for what your rig either. A lot of wheelers are also willing to help out others. If you help someone with parts that your rig doesn't need they're more likely to remember that when they see you need help with something on or off the trail.


	DEAD TIRE: It's always good to carry a spare tire and tire plug kit when out on the trails. You may never need it, but that time that you don't take you probably will.

	RESPECT: Whether it's the ground you're on, your rig, buddy's rig, wives, children, pets...It's all about RESPECT on the trail. We're all out there for one goal: to HAVE FUN!! To me, brand names...don't matter on the trail. It's all about the wheelin'!!!! (Great words of 4xfred. A few of us touched base on the word REPECT, but I thought these words were well put and very important that they needed recognition to who they come from.)

WHEN DRIVING ON FOREST OR PRIVATE LAND:

	GENERAL RULE: There are five basic principles in the words TREAD lightly!

		T ravel only where permitted.
		R espect the rights of others.
		E ducate yourself.
		A void streams, meadows, and wildlife, etc.
		D rive and travel responsible.
		Tread lightly also means leaving no trace of your visit.

	Pack it in... pack it out! Leave only your tracks.
	Leave what you find - Picture and trash are the only things you should take.
	STAY ON THE TRAIL: Don't drive off through "untracked" wilderness trying to be the first one to ever drive your rig "where no man has gone before." Don't make your own short cuts on the trail.

	REPECT WHAT ISN'T YOURS: If you go through a gate, leave it as you found it. Nothing makes a landowner more upset than when a gate's position is changed, cutting off livestock from food or water, or allowing them to escape. If you are about to enter or need to enter private land, be sure to get permission first. Take a track down the middle of the trail if you can. Avoid widening the trail. Cross streams only at fording points.

	KEEP THE NOISE AND DUST DOWN: Both are a form of pollution and you should respect others who are on the trail with you.

	COURTESY: Yield the right of way to bikers, hikers, and people on horseback. Be especially careful when around animals. Pull to the side of the trail; turn off your engine and be quiet, not making any sudden movements until they pass. Also yield the right of way to drivers on the up hill grade or those who are overtaking you.

SAFETY:

	Buckle up! In some places this isn't a suggestion...it is mandatory that everyone be properly secured in the rig.
	Travel with a group and preferably with someone who has been on the trail before.
	Have a citizen's band radio. Establish the "tactical net" you will be using as a group. Having a cellular phone can also be helpful, but the coverage may be very limited.
	Don't drink and drive. The correlation between consumption and damage or injury is significant. Besides, it's against the law.
	Build plenty of time into your schedule so that you don't have to drive after dark.
	Keep a reasonable distance between rigs. Give those around you plenty of room to maneuver.
	Do not speed or use the trail as a racetrack.
	Minimize the use of fire. A wildfire can change an area for hundreds of years. Use fire wisely and safely.
	
IMPORTANT ITEMS:
	A 4x4 rig that is equipped to handle the challenges of the trail.
	Sleeping bag
	Tent or trap
	Personal items
	Prescriptions
	Flashlight
	Towel
	Toilet paper
	Aspirin, etc.
	Camera and film
	Extra clothes
	Jacket
	Rain gear
	Extra rig keys
	First aid kit
	Shovel
	Hachette
	Tools
	Fire extinguisher
	Heavy-duty jack
	Tow strap
	Duct and electrical tape
	Snatch block
	Extra parts
	
	
MOST IMPORTANTLY: Have fun, enjoy and respect the land, and get to know some of the other offroaders. Most people are really glad to lend a hand and help out with advice or trail repair. Beer and driving don't mix even on trails. Some would disagree but I don't believe in drinking if I'm going to drive. Wait for the campfire festivities to open the beer.