

Many of the tools to carry are pretty obvious, but we'll try to give you a rundown to include a few you might not have considered. And along with all your tools and spares, don't forget a few essential safety items such as a fire extinguisher and first-aid kit.

	A wide array of wrenches, ratchets, and sockets is a pretty basic start. Include with those tools some socket extensions, drive adapters, spark plug sockets, Allen keys, and adjustable wrenches for those times you've lost that certain wrench or don't have just the right size.
	
	Quality screwdrivers (sometimes pry bars) are always invaluable. A few pairs of pliers and wire cutters are handy, too, as are locking pliers. We've used one-handed hacksaws for cutting items and cold chisels to gouge and free stubborn parts. More than once we've needed a flat file to clean up damaged threads for reassembly of some component.
	
	Take along your axle hub sockets? Yes! We recently had the need for one in the field and found it was still on loan to a friend. A hammer is always handy, along with a brass drift that will allow you to beat on stuck steel parts without damaging them. Snap-ring pliers are often needed for taking hubs apart.
	
	If you've ever snapped off an axleshaft inside the axletube and wanted to retrieve it easily, you know how valuable a strong telescoping magnet can be. It's also useful when you drop the last bolt you need into some dark crevice in your rig.
	
	A good tire repair kit, or at least a plug kit, can be useful on or off the highway. You never know when a nail might find its way into your tire tread or something sharp on the trail may steal your air. Remember to keep it restocked with plugs if you use some.
	
	An onboard air supply is useful for flat tire repair or to air back up for the highway drive home. CO2 systems are fast and can run air tools, if needed. Air pumps are available in multiple sizes with various levels of capability. Having both may be the best of all worlds.
	
	A shovel is handy for getting unstuck, quenching campfires, and bathroom duties. A bigger hammer can come in handy as well. Rugged Ridge offers its All Terrain Recovery Tool Kit that includes these two tools as well as axe- and pick-heads.
	
	We always like to carry two jacks: a Hi-Lift jack and a simple bottle jack. The Hi-lift is immensely useful for recovery or lifting a tire on a Jeep with long-travel suspension. The bottle jack is handy to use for tire changes when you have access and solid ground on which to place it. We carry recovery straps and winch accessories as well.
	
	Never underestimate the usefulness of a nylon ratchet strap, and we're not just talking about strapping down your cooler. We've seen more steering and suspension parts temporarily patched together with these straps than we can shake a stick at. Sure they stretch some, but they're super handy. Other useful items are a small length of chain, bungee cords, and gloves.
	
	Troubleshooting electrical problems on the trail or a trip is no fun. However, having a simple multimeter may aid in finding the gremlin sooner. Short lengths of wire can be handy as well to bypass bad or suspect wiring. Jumper cables can be the lifeline to a dying battery on a Jeep.
	
	Spare fluids should be a part of your trail tool kit. Fluids can be lost from damage leaks or from rollover. Other maladies can leave you needing vital fluids so you should carry at least a small quantity. Carb cleaner is useful for cleaning during field repairs.
	
	When dealing with repairs or fluids it's nice to have latex gloves handy along with shop towels. Funnels with small enough tips to get into fill tubes will help should you need to top off. Plastic trash bags are handy to lie on or accept greasy, broken parts. Zip-lock bags can store loose parts as well.
	
	We keep some patch products in our tool kit. These include duct and electrical tape, safety and bailing wire, zip-ties, and several types of epoxy that just might save the day. Many field repairs display the ingenuity of Jeepers. Having a few helpful products can make that task easier.
	
	Now, where do you store all this stuff? We use all manner of soft tool bags to store all the smaller tools and items. We also use zippered tool pouches, tactical molle bags, and even some luggage-type canvas bags. By using different bags you can store like items in the same bag, and find areas in your Jeep to store the soft bags.