

When it comes to off-road recovery, winches are pretty important. When recovery straps aren’t enough to jerk your rig out of trouble, it’s time to bust out the Warn and get to work. If you’re new to off-roading and/or winch recovery, here are eight simple tips that will help you get the most out of your winch.

	1.	Battery power is really important. If your vehicle has a winch, you want to invest in the largest battery that you can fit into your rig with the most CCA (cold cranking amps) available. CCA ratings are a quick and dirty way to assess battery power, with higher power being more desirable.
	When you select a battery, you also want to pay attention to the MRC rating, which stands for “minute reserve capacity.” Higher MRC ratings mean that your battery can power the winch for longer periods of time before the battery dies or the performance of the winch begins to fall off.
		Finally, take a minute to calculate the durability of your battery using this formula:
		Time Duration of Pull = (A/W) x T
		where:
		A = Reserve capacity amperage rating (typically this is 25 amps)
		W = Winch amp draw at rated pull
		T = Reserve capacity time (in minutes) of your battery
	Obviously, higher time duration is better when you’re stuck and all alone.

	2.	Test your alternator. Your alternator’s job is to charge your battery, and you need the battery to operate at peak efficiency. So, an alternator test is a good idea, especially if your vehicle has a few miles on it. If your alternator needs rewound or replaced, consider upgrading to a new alternator with a higher amperage rating.

	3.	Power cables matter too. Believe it or not, battery cables are very important to optimal winch performance. Use number 00 welding cables for ground and positive cables, and use the shortest run of cable possible from the battery to the winch. Finally, do not ground the cable to the vehicle’s frame or bumper, as this will often increase the resistance the battery has to work against. Finally, ensure all electrical connections are secure.

	4.	Longer pulls are better. The pulling power of most winches increases as the amount of rope on the drum decreases. Therefore, putting the most distance you can between your vehicle and the hook will increase the pulling power of your winch.

	5.	Long, sustained pulls are bad. If you want your winch and battery to last, avoid pulling for more than 1-2 minutes at a time. Long pulls cause heat to build up in your winch motor, and if this heat isn’t allowed to dissipate, it will damage the motor and reduce performance. Additionally, when you’re winching the battery in your vehicle likely discharges faster than your alternator can charge it. If you take a break every minute or two, you’ll reduce the load on the battery and keep the charge up.

	6.	Break-in new rope. Breaking in a new rope is wise, mostly because you don’t want to find out that it’s defective in the field. However, it’s also smart to pre-stretch a rope before use so it doesn’t form a weak spot during your first recovery. In order to do this, you must pre-stretch the rope uniformly. Just unwind all but the last few warps of rope, hook the end of the rope to a stationary object, and then slowly but surely pull your vehicle towards the hook. While pulling, apply moderate brake pressure – you’re not trying to make the winch work so much as you’re trying to give the rope a good uniform pull along it’s entire length.

	7.	Re-spool it right. Whenever you use your winch, take the time to re-spool it properly. Hap-hazard spooling is bad, mostly because it results in kinks and weak spots in your rope.

	8.	Check your battery often. Believe it or not, running your battery down just one time can result in permanent damage. Therefore, it’s a good idea to test your battery regularly.
If you follow these eight tips, you’ll get maximum life and performance from your winch, and you’ll be able to rely upon your winch when you really need it.


Now, when the time comes to actually use your winch, the following tips techniques can help you maximize the effectiveness of your winch.

Straight Pull
The most common rigging is a straight pull. You hook up to an anchor (a tree or rock) directly in front of you and pull yourself out. Or you connect straight on to a stuck vehicle and pull it out. When connecting to a tree, use a tree strap. A cable around a tree will crush, break, or cut the bark, leaving the tree susceptible to disease and disrupting the flow of nutrients, hurting or killing a tree like the one pictured above. A tree strap also gives a better point to connect the winch line. If you loop a winch line around a tree and hook it back on itself, the steel cable will be kinked, creating a weak point. Use a 3/4-inch screw pin bow shackle (commonly called a D-ring) to connect the tree strap to the winch line. Pass the D-ring through both loops on the tree strap and tighten the screw pin finger tight. Then back it off 1/4 to 1/2 turn. This will prevent it from becoming super tight and difficult to remove later. A 3/4-inch D-ring has a working load limit (WLL) of 4.75 tons. It will be stamped on the bow. That translates to 9,500 pounds. Typically the safety margin is at least 5:1. This means that the D-ring will not break until in the neighborhood of 47,000 to 50,000 pounds. Comforting! Don't use anything smaller than the 3/4-inch D-ring. You need at least two D-rings, and this is one case where more is better (six is not too many). Do not use a recovery strap as a substitute for a tree strap. Typical recovery straps are designed to stretch 10 to 15 percent. It is not a good idea to introduce additional recoil into the winch rigging. The sweet spot for tree strap length is about 15 feet. Many straps on the market are too short for a stout tree. And as an added bonus, a longer tree strap might just give you the extra foot needed to reach the tree. Connect the winch hook to the D-ring on the tree so the open side faces up. This is an extra safety precaution. In the event the hook breaks, it will recoil toward the ground.

Rating
Never use any equipment you do not know the load rating of. This applies to straps, D-rings, pulleys, the winch line, and the winch. Unfortunately, not all of our equipment has the level of safety margin built into a D-ring. A 5/16-inch steel line is rated at an ultimate breaking strength of 9,800 pounds. On a 9,500-pound rated winch, the safety margin is minimal—almost one to one. Fortunately, we seldom need to pull max loads and there are ways to reduce the load on the line using pulleys. By the way, a 5/16-inch synthetic line is stronger (about 15,500 pounds). And a 3/8-inch synthetic rope can easily be substituted—at 19,600 pounds of ultimate breaking strength. Winch kits often come with a pulley. If the pulley rating is not stamped into the metal, do it yourself. Overtime, stick-on labels are destroyed. 

An Angle Pull
Sometimes, you cannot get in a direct line with the vehicle you plan to recover. Using a pulley, you can bend around a corner for an "angle pull." Even in situations when a direct run could be made, the line may leave the winch at an undesirable angle. Using a pulley allows the line to work straight off the winch. Connect the pulley to a tree strap with a D-ring as before in the straight-line pull. Under light tension, push down on each side of the strap to test if each one has about the same tension. If not, back off the winch line and rotate the strap a bit. Otherwise, when the load on the rigging finally exceeds the drag from the bark of the tree, the strap will suddenly adjust and create a spike load. There should be no jerks or surprise spikes of energy introduced that exceed the capability of the equipment. On a big gnarly tree, the strap may get hung up and not rotate smoothly to where it needs to be—exactly half the angle between your vehicle and the one you are pulling out. No surprise spike of energy applies to the vehicle to be recovered, as well. If a tire suddenly gets tractions and then loses it, letting the vehicle fall back, it will transfer a sudden spike load into the rigging. Check that the line does not contact the edges of the pulley. The tree strap is normally flexible enough that it will permit the pulley to rotate a bit so the line runs smoothly through.

Rigging a Double-Line Pull
Pulleys have some wonderful characteristics we can use to our advantage. Besides changing the direction of the line (angle pull), they can "double the power" of the winch. If you run the winch line straight out to a pulley on a tree (strap) and straight back to your vehicle, the winch will be able to pull twice as much because the full load is split between the two lines and the winch only has to deal with the load on its side. If the load is 10,000 pounds, the winch only sees 5,000 pounds. To move the vehicle one foot now, the winch has to pull twice as much line (one foot from each side). Pulling twice as much line cuts the speed on the ground in half.

Two-Way Pull
The ability to pull a vehicle in two directions at the same time with its own winch is very handy. The vehicle could be in a situation where it is stuck and at risk of rolling over. Or it could be leaning against a rock that will take out the door unless some clearance is achieved. The vehicle needs to be pulled forward and sideways at the same time. It takes two pulleys and two anchor locations. Naturally there is an ideal location for these anchors, but use what nature has provided where it is. Put a tree strap and pulley on an anchor somewhere in front of the vehicle. Place a second pulley on an anchor somewhere to the side and a bit in front of the vehicle. The winch line runs through the first pulley to the second pulley and then back to a location on the side or rear corner of the vehicle. Use another tree strap to make the connection to the vehicle. The strap is less likely to damage the vehicle if it comes in contact. A strap can usually be looped through a rock rail or to a recovery point on the bumper. Rock rails make nice anchor points. In a worst-case situation, open the doors and run the strap through and over the roof. Don’t just run a strap through the windows; it will crush the thin slot the window rolls up into. The rigging pulls the vehicle in two directions, forward and sideways. During the recovery, attention needs to be focused on the rear tire bead. Too much sideway angle and the bead may roll off. It is an angle change only. Neither pulley increases the winch power. The same result can be accomplished with one pulley and one anchor point. There is more risk of the line along side of the vehicle coming in contact with the vehicle. It will move closer and closer to the vehicle as the winch operation proceeds.

Pull Pal
An anchor can be established anywhere it is needed with a Pull Pal. Sometimes, the only anchor available is the one created with the Pull Pal. Sand dunes come to mind. Assemble the Pull Pal and place it where an anchor is needed. Actually place it one or two feet behind where it’s needed. It will be dragged a short distance in the process of burying it. As a precaution to recover the Pull Pal after use, loop a strap around the base where the spade attaches. Then rig up your winch and connect it to the Pull Pal with a D-ring. The Pull Pal will bury itself as you start winching. Eventually, it will become like a solid anchor, and the stuck vehicle will start to move. It will put an initial load on the rigging, so make sure all your connections look good before putting the full load on the winch to bury the Pull Pal. On hard ground, someone will need to steady the Pull Pal until the spade has dug itself in six to 10 inches. Recovery operations are a fact of off-road driving. While hazardous by nature, you not only clear your vehicle by using proper equipment and technique, you ensure that you are around to drive another day.